#
# This file is autogenerated by pip-compile with Python 3.10
# by the following command:
#
#    pip-compile requirements.in
#
accessible-pygments==0.0.4
    # via pydata-sphinx-theme
alabaster==0.7.13
    # via sphinx
anyio==3.7.0
    # via jupyter-server
appnope==0.1.3
    # via
    #   ipykernel
    #   ipython
argon2-cffi==21.3.0
    # via
    #   jupyter-server
    #   nbclassic
    #   notebook
argon2-cffi-bindings==21.2.0
    # via argon2-cffi
arrow==1.2.3
    # via isoduration
asttokens==2.2.1
    # via stack-data
async-lru==2.0.2
    # via jupyterlab
attrs==23.1.0
    # via
    #   jsonschema
    #   jupyter-cache
babel==2.12.1
    # via
    #   jupyterlab-server
    #   pydata-sphinx-theme
    #   sphinx
backcall==0.2.0
    # via ipython
beautifulsoup4==4.12.2
    # via
    #   nbconvert
    #   pydata-sphinx-theme
black==23.3.0
    # via -r requirements.in
bleach==6.0.0
    # via nbconvert
certifi==2023.5.7
    # via requests
cffi==1.15.1
    # via argon2-cffi-bindings
charset-normalizer==3.1.0
    # via requests
click==8.1.3
    # via
    #   black
    #   dask
    #   jupyter-book
    #   jupyter-cache
    #   sphinx-external-toc
    #   typer
cloudpickle==2.2.1
    # via dask
cmake==3.26.3
    # via -r requirements.in
comm==0.1.3
    # via ipykernel
contourpy==1.0.7
    # via matplotlib
cycler==0.11.0
    # via matplotlib
cython==0.29.35
    # via -r requirements.in
dask==2023.5.1
    # via -r requirements.in
debugpy==1.6.7
    # via ipykernel
decorator==5.1.1
    # via ipython
defusedxml==0.7.1
    # via nbconvert
docutils==0.18.1
    # via
    #   jupyter-book
    #   myst-parser
    #   pybtex-docutils
    #   pydata-sphinx-theme
    #   sphinx
    #   sphinx-togglebutton
    #   sphinxcontrib-bibtex
exceptiongroup==1.1.2
    # via
    #   anyio
    #   pytest
executing==1.2.0
    # via stack-data
fastjsonschema==2.17.1
    # via nbformat
ffmpeg==1.4
    # via -r requirements.in
flake8==6.0.0
    # via -r requirements.in
fonttools==4.39.4
    # via matplotlib
fqdn==1.5.1
    # via jsonschema
fsspec==2023.5.0
    # via dask
idna==3.4
    # via
    #   anyio
    #   jsonschema
    #   requests
imagesize==1.4.1
    # via sphinx
importlib-metadata==6.6.0
    # via
    #   dask
    #   jupyter-cache
    #   myst-nb
iniconfig==2.0.0
    # via pytest
ipykernel==6.23.1
    # via
    #   ipywidgets
    #   jupyter
    #   jupyter-console
    #   jupyterlab
    #   myst-nb
    #   nbclassic
    #   notebook
    #   qtconsole
ipython==8.13.2
    # via
    #   -r requirements.in
    #   ipykernel
    #   ipywidgets
    #   jupyter-console
    #   myst-nb
ipython-genutils==0.2.0
    # via
    #   nbclassic
    #   notebook
    #   qtconsole
ipywidgets==8.0.6
    # via jupyter
isoduration==20.11.0
    # via jsonschema
jedi==0.18.2
    # via ipython
jinja2==3.1.2
    # via
    #   jupyter-book
    #   jupyter-server
    #   jupyterlab
    #   jupyterlab-server
    #   myst-parser
    #   nbclassic
    #   nbconvert
    #   notebook
    #   sphinx
json5==0.9.14
    # via jupyterlab-server
jsonpointer==2.3
    # via jsonschema
jsonschema[format-nongpl]==4.17.3
    # via
    #   jupyter-book
    #   jupyter-events
    #   jupyterlab-server
    #   nbformat
jupyter==1.0.0
    # via -r requirements.in
jupyter-book==0.15.1
    # via -r requirements.in
jupyter-cache==0.6.1
    # via myst-nb
jupyter-client==8.2.0
    # via
    #   ipykernel
    #   jupyter-console
    #   jupyter-server
    #   nbclassic
    #   nbclient
    #   notebook
    #   qtconsole
jupyter-console==6.6.3
    # via jupyter
jupyter-core==5.3.0
    # via
    #   ipykernel
    #   jupyter-client
    #   jupyter-console
    #   jupyter-server
    #   jupyterlab
    #   nbclassic
    #   nbclient
    #   nbconvert
    #   nbformat
    #   notebook
    #   qtconsole
jupyter-events==0.6.3
    # via jupyter-server
jupyter-lsp==2.2.0
    # via jupyterlab
jupyter-server==2.6.0
    # via
    #   jupyter-lsp
    #   jupyterlab
    #   jupyterlab-server
    #   nbclassic
    #   notebook-shim
jupyter-server-terminals==0.4.4
    # via jupyter-server
jupyterlab==4.0.1
    # via -r requirements.in
jupyterlab-pygments==0.2.2
    # via nbconvert
jupyterlab-server==2.22.1
    # via jupyterlab
jupyterlab-widgets==3.0.7
    # via ipywidgets
jupytext==1.14.5
    # via -r requirements.in
kiwisolver==1.4.4
    # via matplotlib
latexcodec==2.0.1
    # via pybtex
line-profiler==4.0.3
    # via -r requirements.in
linkify-it-py==2.0.2
    # via jupyter-book
llvmlite==0.40.0
    # via numba
locket==1.0.0
    # via partd
markdown-it-py==2.2.0
    # via
    #   jupytext
    #   mdit-py-plugins
    #   myst-parser
markupsafe==2.1.2
    # via
    #   jinja2
    #   nbconvert
matplotlib==3.7.1
    # via
    #   -r requirements.in
    #   seaborn
matplotlib-inline==0.1.6
    # via
    #   ipykernel
    #   ipython
mccabe==0.7.0
    # via flake8
mdit-py-plugins==0.3.5
    # via
    #   jupytext
    #   myst-parser
mdurl==0.1.2
    # via markdown-it-py
mistune==2.0.5
    # via nbconvert
mypy==1.3.0
    # via -r requirements.in
mypy-extensions==1.0.0
    # via
    #   black
    #   mypy
myst-nb==0.17.2
    # via jupyter-book
myst-parser==0.18.1
    # via myst-nb
nbclassic==1.0.0
    # via notebook
nbclient==0.7.4
    # via
    #   jupyter-cache
    #   myst-nb
    #   nbconvert
nbconvert==7.4.0
    # via
    #   jupyter
    #   jupyter-server
    #   nbclassic
    #   notebook
nbformat==5.8.0
    # via
    #   jupyter-cache
    #   jupyter-server
    #   jupytext
    #   myst-nb
    #   nbclassic
    #   nbclient
    #   nbconvert
    #   notebook
nest-asyncio==1.5.6
    # via
    #   ipykernel
    #   nbclassic
    #   notebook
notebook==6.5.4
    # via jupyter
notebook-shim==0.2.3
    # via
    #   jupyterlab
    #   nbclassic
numba==0.57.0
    # via -r requirements.in
numpy==1.24.3
    # via
    #   -r requirements.in
    #   contourpy
    #   matplotlib
    #   numba
    #   pandas
    #   scipy
    #   seaborn
overrides==7.3.1
    # via jupyter-server
packaging==23.1
    # via
    #   black
    #   dask
    #   ipykernel
    #   jupyter-server
    #   jupyterlab
    #   jupyterlab-server
    #   matplotlib
    #   nbconvert
    #   pydata-sphinx-theme
    #   pytest
    #   qtconsole
    #   qtpy
    #   sphinx
pandas==2.0.2
    # via
    #   -r requirements.in
    #   seaborn
pandocfilters==1.5.0
    # via nbconvert
parso==0.8.3
    # via jedi
partd==1.4.0
    # via dask
pathspec==0.11.1
    # via black
pexpect==4.8.0
    # via ipython
pickleshare==0.7.5
    # via ipython
pillow==9.5.0
    # via matplotlib
platformdirs==3.5.1
    # via
    #   black
    #   jupyter-core
pluggy==1.0.0
    # via pytest
prometheus-client==0.17.0
    # via
    #   jupyter-server
    #   nbclassic
    #   notebook
prompt-toolkit==3.0.38
    # via
    #   ipython
    #   jupyter-console
psutil==5.9.5
    # via ipykernel
ptyprocess==0.7.0
    # via
    #   pexpect
    #   terminado
pure-eval==0.2.2
    # via stack-data
pybind11==2.10.4
    # via -r requirements.in
pybtex==0.24.0
    # via
    #   pybtex-docutils
    #   sphinxcontrib-bibtex
pybtex-docutils==1.0.2
    # via sphinxcontrib-bibtex
pycodestyle==2.10.0
    # via flake8
pycparser==2.21
    # via cffi
pydata-sphinx-theme==0.13.3
    # via sphinx-book-theme
pyflakes==3.0.1
    # via flake8
pygments==2.15.1
    # via
    #   accessible-pygments
    #   ipython
    #   jupyter-console
    #   nbconvert
    #   pydata-sphinx-theme
    #   qtconsole
    #   sphinx
pyparsing==3.0.9
    # via matplotlib
pyrsistent==0.19.3
    # via jsonschema
pytest==7.3.1
    # via -r requirements.in
python-dateutil==2.8.2
    # via
    #   arrow
    #   jupyter-client
    #   matplotlib
    #   pandas
python-json-logger==2.0.7
    # via jupyter-events
pytz==2023.3
    # via pandas
pyyaml==6.0
    # via
    #   dask
    #   jupyter-book
    #   jupyter-cache
    #   jupyter-events
    #   jupytext
    #   myst-nb
    #   myst-parser
    #   pybtex
    #   sphinx-external-toc
pyzmq==25.1.0
    # via
    #   ipykernel
    #   jupyter-client
    #   jupyter-console
    #   jupyter-server
    #   nbclassic
    #   notebook
    #   qtconsole
qtconsole==5.4.3
    # via jupyter
qtpy==2.3.1
    # via qtconsole
requests==2.31.0
    # via
    #   jupyterlab-server
    #   sphinx
rfc3339-validator==0.1.4
    # via
    #   jsonschema
    #   jupyter-events
rfc3986-validator==0.1.1
    # via
    #   jsonschema
    #   jupyter-events
scipy==1.10.1
    # via -r requirements.in
seaborn==0.12.2
    # via -r requirements.in
send2trash==1.8.2
    # via
    #   jupyter-server
    #   nbclassic
    #   notebook
six==1.16.0
    # via
    #   asttokens
    #   bleach
    #   latexcodec
    #   pybtex
    #   python-dateutil
    #   rfc3339-validator
sniffio==1.3.0
    # via anyio
snowballstemmer==2.2.0
    # via sphinx
soupsieve==2.4.1
    # via beautifulsoup4
sphinx==5.0.2
    # via
    #   -r requirements.in
    #   jupyter-book
    #   myst-nb
    #   myst-parser
    #   pydata-sphinx-theme
    #   sphinx-book-theme
    #   sphinx-comments
    #   sphinx-copybutton
    #   sphinx-design
    #   sphinx-exercise
    #   sphinx-external-toc
    #   sphinx-inline-tabs
    #   sphinx-jupyterbook-latex
    #   sphinx-multitoc-numbering
    #   sphinx-thebe
    #   sphinx-togglebutton
    #   sphinxcontrib-bibtex
sphinx-book-theme==1.0.1
    # via
    #   jupyter-book
    #   sphinx-exercise
sphinx-comments==0.0.3
    # via jupyter-book
sphinx-copybutton==0.5.2
    # via jupyter-book
sphinx-design==0.3.0
    # via jupyter-book
sphinx-exercise==0.4.1
    # via -r requirements.in
sphinx-external-toc==0.3.1
    # via jupyter-book
sphinx-inline-tabs==2023.4.21
    # via -r requirements.in
sphinx-jupyterbook-latex==0.5.2
    # via jupyter-book
sphinx-multitoc-numbering==0.1.3
    # via jupyter-book
sphinx-thebe==0.2.1
    # via jupyter-book
sphinx-togglebutton==0.3.2
    # via jupyter-book
sphinxcontrib-applehelp==1.0.4
    # via sphinx
sphinxcontrib-bibtex==2.5.0
    # via
    #   -r requirements.in
    #   jupyter-book
sphinxcontrib-devhelp==1.0.2
    # via sphinx
sphinxcontrib-htmlhelp==2.0.1
    # via sphinx
sphinxcontrib-jsmath==1.0.1
    # via sphinx
sphinxcontrib-qthelp==1.0.3
    # via sphinx
sphinxcontrib-serializinghtml==1.1.5
    # via sphinx
sqlalchemy==2.0.15
    # via jupyter-cache
stack-data==0.6.2
    # via ipython
tabulate==0.9.0
    # via jupyter-cache
terminado==0.17.1
    # via
    #   jupyter-server
    #   jupyter-server-terminals
    #   nbclassic
    #   notebook
tinycss2==1.2.1
    # via nbconvert
toml==0.10.2
    # via jupytext
tomli==2.0.1
    # via
    #   black
    #   jupyterlab
    #   mypy
    #   pytest
toolz==0.12.0
    # via
    #   dask
    #   partd
tornado==6.3.2
    # via
    #   ipykernel
    #   jupyter-client
    #   jupyter-server
    #   jupyterlab
    #   nbclassic
    #   notebook
    #   terminado
traitlets==5.9.0
    # via
    #   comm
    #   ipykernel
    #   ipython
    #   ipywidgets
    #   jupyter-client
    #   jupyter-console
    #   jupyter-core
    #   jupyter-events
    #   jupyter-server
    #   jupyterlab
    #   matplotlib-inline
    #   nbclassic
    #   nbclient
    #   nbconvert
    #   nbformat
    #   notebook
    #   qtconsole
typer==0.9.0
    # via -r requirements.in
typing-extensions==4.6.2
    # via
    #   async-lru
    #   mypy
    #   myst-nb
    #   myst-parser
    #   pydata-sphinx-theme
    #   sqlalchemy
    #   typer
tzdata==2023.3
    # via pandas
uc-micro-py==1.0.2
    # via linkify-it-py
uri-template==1.2.0
    # via jsonschema
urllib3==2.0.2
    # via requests
wcwidth==0.2.6
    # via prompt-toolkit
webcolors==1.13
    # via jsonschema
webencodings==0.5.1
    # via
    #   bleach
    #   tinycss2
websocket-client==1.5.2
    # via jupyter-server
wheel==0.40.0
    # via sphinx-togglebutton
widgetsnbextension==4.0.7
    # via ipywidgets
zipp==3.15.0
    # via importlib-metadata

# The following packages are considered to be unsafe in a requirements file:
# setuptools
